add sql console blog post (#2346)
huggingface/blog: sql-console.md

---
title: "Introducing the SQL Console on Datasets" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/sql_console/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: cfahlgren1
---

Datasets have been exploding and Hugging Face has become the default home for many datasets. 

# Datasets Growth

Each month, as the amount of datasets uploaded compounds, and so does the need to query, filter and discover them.

![Dataset Monthly Creations](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/dataset_monthly_creations.png) 
_Datasets created on Hugging Face Hub each month_

We are very excited to announce that you can now run SQL queries on your datasets directly in the Hugging Face Hub!

# Introducing the SQL Console for Datasets

On every dataset you should see a new **SQL Console** badge. In one click, you can open a [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) SQL Console for the given dataset.

> ![SQLConsole](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/SQLConsole.gif)

Reviewer: the gif is a bit blurry no ?

Reviewer 2: you can embed a mp4 if it's better

Author: yeah I'll do mp4, was trying to find a good compression so it wasn't too big. But mp4 is going to be better

Author: looks much better with mp4
<img width="651" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39d1bb7b-fc6b-4e86-ba76-308f8deaaffb">

All the work is done in the browser and the console comes with a few neat features:

- **100% Local**: The SQL Console is powered by DuckDB WASM, so you can query your dataset without any dependencies.
- **Full DuckDB Syntax**: DuckDB has [full SQL](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/introduction.html) syntax support along with many built in functions for regex, lists, JSON, embeddings and more. You'll find, DuckDB syntax is very similar to PostgreSQL.
- **Export Results**: You can export the results of your query to parquet.
- **Shareable**: You can share your query results of public datasets with a link.

# How it works

## Parquet Conversion

> To power the dataset viewer on Hugging Face, the first 5GB of every dataset is auto-converted to Parquet (unless it was already a Parquet dataset). Parquet is a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. 

Reviewer: maybe link to the API to list parquet files ?

> To power the dataset viewer on Hugging Face, the first 5GB of every dataset is auto-converted to Parquet (unless it was already a Parquet dataset). Parquet is a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To power the dataset viewer on Hugging Face, the first 5GB of every dataset is auto-converted to Parquet (unless it was already a Parquet dataset, then you have the full dataset). Parquet is a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. 
```

maybe a bit heavy?

or reverse the two: present the full dataset if it's in Parquet, and auto-conversion second

By being soley in the browser, it gives the user the upmost flexibility to query data as they please without any dependencies. It also makes it really simple to share reproducible results with a simple link.

You may be wondering, _"Will it work for big datasets?"_ and the answer is, "Yes!". 

Here's a query of the [OpenCo7/UpVoteWeb](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenCo7/UpVoteWeb) dataset which has `12.6M` rows in the Parquet conversion.

![Reddit Movie Suggestions](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/reddit-movie-suggestions.png)

You can see we received results for a simple filter query in under 3 seconds. 

While queries will take longer based on the size of the dataset and query complexity, you will be suprised about how much you can do with the SQL Console. 

As with any technology, there are limitations.
- The SQL Console will work for a lot of queries, however, the memory limit is ~3GB, so it is possible to run out of memory and not be able to process the query (_Tip: try to use filters to reduce the amount of data you are querying along with `LIMIT`_).

> - While DuckDB WASM is very powerful, it is not fully feature parity with DuckDB. For example, DuckDB WASM does not yet support the `hf://` protocol to download datasets.

Reviewer: maybe you can link to https://duckdb.org/2024/05/29/access-150k-plus-datasets-from-hugging-face-with-duckdb.html

Reviewer 2: and maybe link to the PR or issue about supporting hf:// paths in duckdb-wasm

Author: done!

## Example: Converting a dataset from Alpaca to conversations

> For finetuning, there are different formats you can use. One common format is conversational. This is where each row is a conversation between a user and the model and consists of multiple turns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For finetuning a LLM, there are different formats you can use. One common format is conversational. This is where each row is a conversation between a user and the model and consists of multiple turns.
```

the transition from the previous sections/subjects is a bit abrupt haha

Author: haha let me transition a little better here.

Reviewer 2: no big deal, done is better than perfect :)

Author: updated in latest commit

In this example, we will convert an Alpaca dataset to a conversational format. 

Typically, it would be easiest to do this with a script, however, we can also use the SQL Console to do this in 30 seconds. 

<iframe

>   src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/yahma/alpaca-cleaned/embed/viewer/default/train?sql=--+Convert+Alpaca+format+to+Conversation+format%0AWITH+%0Asource_view+AS+%28%0A++SELECT+*+FROM+train++--+Change+%27train%27+to+your+desired+view+name+here%0A%29%0ASELECT+%0A++%5B%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27user%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+CASE+%0A+++++++++++++++++++WHEN+input+IS+NOT+NULL+AND+input+%21%3D+%27%27+%0A+++++++++++++++++++THEN+instruction+%7C%7C+%27%5Cn%5Cn%27+%7C%7C+input%0A+++++++++++++++++++ELSE+instruction%0A+++++++++++++++++END%0A++++%29%2C%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27assistant%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+output%0A++++%29%0A++%5D+AS+conversation%0AFROM+source_view%0AWHERE+instruction+IS+NOT+NULL+%0AAND+output+IS+NOT+NULL%3B"

Reviewer: this link doesn't open the SQL console apparently, you can fix it by adding sql_console:true

```suggestion
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/yahma/alpaca-cleaned/embed/viewer/default/train?sql_console=true&sql=--+Convert+Alpaca+format+to+Conversation+format%0AWITH+%0Asource_view+AS+%28%0A++SELECT+*+FROM+train++--+Change+%27train%27+to+your+desired+view+name+here%0A%29%0ASELECT+%0A++%5B%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27user%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+CASE+%0A+++++++++++++++++++WHEN+input+IS+NOT+NULL+AND+input+%21%3D+%27%27+%0A+++++++++++++++++++THEN+instruction+%7C%7C+%27%5Cn%5Cn%27+%7C%7C+input%0A+++++++++++++++++++ELSE+instruction%0A+++++++++++++++++END%0A++++%29%2C%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27assistant%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+output%0A++++%29%0A++%5D+AS+conversation%0AFROM+source_view%0AWHERE+instruction+IS+NOT+NULL+%0AAND+output+IS+NOT+NULL%3B"
```

Author: But it will crash a certain small portion of very old mobile / tablet devices that can't support duckdb wasm? Are we sure the tradeoff is worth it?

Reviewer 3: I agree, I was expecting to see the query in the console :)

Typically, it would be easiest to do this with a script, however, we can also use the SQL Console to do this in 30 seconds. 

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/yahma/alpaca-cleaned/embed/viewer/default/train?sql=--+Convert+Alpaca+format+to+Conversation+format%0AWITH+%0Asource_view+AS+%28%0A++SELECT+*+FROM+train++--+Change+%27train%27+to+your+desired+view+name+here%0A%29%0ASELECT+%0A++%5B%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27user%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+CASE+%0A+++++++++++++++++++WHEN+input+IS+NOT+NULL+AND+input+%21%3D+%27%27+%0A+++++++++++++++++++THEN+instruction+%7C%7C+%27%5Cn%5Cn%27+%7C%7C+input%0A+++++++++++++++++++ELSE+instruction%0A+++++++++++++++++END%0A++++%29%2C%0A++++struct_pack%28%0A++++++%22from%22+%3A%3D+%27assistant%27%2C%0A++++++%22value%22+%3A%3D+output%0A++++%29%0A++%5D+AS+conversation%0AFROM+source_view%0AWHERE+instruction+IS+NOT+NULL+%0AAND+output+IS+NOT+NULL%3B"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>

In the dataset above, click on the **SQL Console** badge to open the SQL Console. You should see the query below automatically populated.

> When you are ready, click the **Run Query** button to execute the query. 

Author: Here I am having the SQL Console be pre-populated with SQL, but not automatically open via the `sql_console=true`. 

The reason being that not all devices can run duckdb wasm so didn't want to have it auto load and page crash or something. User can still click the `SQL Console` badge and it'll load the DuckDB query.

<img width="846" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41e2b415-4c5a-43ef-bed3-69a01d48e44c">

Reviewer: I feel like it's better to open set sql_console=true anyway, otherwise people won't see the button right away compared to all the information in a dataset viewer table

Author: But it will crash a certain small portion of very old mobile / tablet devices that can't support duckdb wasm? Are we sure the tradeoff is worth it? You can read more [here](https://discord.com/channels/879548962464493619/1283535760938766346/1285417568764432468).

Reviewer: oh you're saying it might crash the blog post page ? yea in that case I guess it's fine to keep it as is

Author: Yeah this specific post page since duckdb wasm isn't supported on **every** device. So having the 1 click action will mitigate it.

Reviewer 2: (but it does't block this blog publication imo)

Reviewer: yes oc

Author: agreed. yeah I'm going to create an issue for them. maybe at least fail gracefully or something

<figure class="image flex flex-col items-center text-center m-0 w-full">
   <video
      alt="SQL Console Demo"
      autoplay loop autobuffer muted playsinline
    >
    <source src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/Magpie-Ultra-Demo-SQL-Console.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="text-center text-sm italic">Querying the Magpie-Ultra dataset for excellent, high quality reasoning instructions.</figcaption>
</figure>

All the work is done in the browser and the console comes with a few neat features:

- **100% Local**: The SQL Console is powered by [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) WASM, so you can query your dataset without any dependencies.
- **Full DuckDB Syntax**: DuckDB has [full SQL](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/introduction.html) syntax support, along with many built in functions for regex, lists, JSON, embeddings and more. You'll find DuckDB syntax to be very similar to PostgreSQL.
- **Export Results**: You can export the results of your query to parquet.
- **Shareable**: You can share your query results of public datasets with a link.

## How it works

### Parquet Conversion

> To power the dataset viewer on Hugging Face, the first 5GB of every dataset is auto-converted to Parquet (unless it was already a Parquet dataset, then you have the full dataset). Parquet is a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. You can find more information about the Parquet conversion process in the [Parquet List API documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/dataset-viewer/en/parquet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most datasets on Hugging Face are stored in Parquet, a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. The Dataset Viewer on Hugging Face and the SQL Console load the data directly from the datasets Parquet files. And if the dataset is in another format, the first 5GB is auto-converted to Parquet. You can find more information about the Parquet conversion process in the [Parquet List API documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/dataset-viewer/en/parquet).
```

> Using this Parquet conversion, the SQL Console creates views for you to query based on your dataset splits and configs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the Parquet files, the SQL Console creates views for you to query based on your dataset splits and configs. 
```

---
title: "Introducing the SQL Console on Datasets" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/sql_console/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: cfahlgren1
---

> Datasets have been exploding and Hugging Face has become the default home for many datasets. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Datasets use has been exploding and Hugging Face has become the default home for many datasets. 
```

Shouldn't we add something more here? Or maybe remove this line and the `Datasets Growth` title and use the text in that section as an intro.

Author: Yeah I am in favor of removing the title as it doesn't add much

Author: removed in [c34824f](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/2346/commits/c34824f07dc1d4fe0fb1594a72d1e507c9561e5c)

> # Datasets Growth

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Datasets Growth
```

The title is a level-1 heading; sections should be level 2 so the automatic TOC works and the design is consistent :)

Author: gotcha, will update!

> Each month, as the amount of datasets uploaded compounds, and so does the need to query, filter and discover them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each month, as the amount of datasets uploaded to the Hub increases, so does the need to query, filter and discover them.
```

![Dataset Monthly Creations](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/dataset_monthly_creations.png) 
_Datasets created on Hugging Face Hub each month_

We are very excited to announce that you can now run SQL queries on your datasets directly in the Hugging Face Hub!

# Introducing the SQL Console for Datasets

> On every dataset you should see a new **SQL Console** badge. In one click, you can open a [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) SQL Console for the given dataset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On every public dataset you should see a new **SQL Console** badge. With just one click you can open a SQL Console to query that dataset.
```

I think it only works for public datasets?

Author: currently yes, I can update the post when gated + private support is out.

<figure class="image flex flex-col items-center text-center m-0 w-full">
   <video
      alt="SQL Console Demo"
      autoplay loop autobuffer muted playsinline
    >
    <source src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/Magpie-Ultra-Demo-SQL-Console.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="text-center text-sm italic">Querying the Magpie-Ultra dataset for excellent, high quality reasoning instructions.</figcaption>
</figure>

All the work is done in the browser and the console comes with a few neat features:

> - **100% Local**: The SQL Console is powered by DuckDB WASM, so you can query your dataset without any dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **100% Local**: The SQL Console is powered by [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/) WASM, so you can query your dataset without any dependencies.
```

> - **Full DuckDB Syntax**: DuckDB has [full SQL](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/introduction.html) syntax support along with many built in functions for regex, lists, JSON, embeddings and more. You'll find, DuckDB syntax is very similar to PostgreSQL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Full DuckDB Syntax**: DuckDB has [full SQL](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/introduction.html) syntax support, along with many built in functions for regex, lists, JSON, embeddings and more. You'll find DuckDB syntax to be very similar to PostgreSQL.
```

- **Export Results**: You can export the results of your query to parquet.
- **Shareable**: You can share your query results of public datasets with a link.

# How it works

> ## Parquet Conversion

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How it works

### Parquet Conversion
```

To power the dataset viewer on Hugging Face, the first 5GB of every dataset is auto-converted to Parquet (unless it was already a Parquet dataset, then you have the full dataset). Parquet is a columnar data format that is optimized for performance and storage efficiency. You can find more information about the Parquet conversion process in the [Parquet List API documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/dataset-viewer/en/parquet).

> Using this parquet conversion, the SQL Console creates views for you to query based on your dataset splits and configs. 

Reviewer 4: always capitalized

```suggestion
Using this Parquet conversion, the SQL Console creates views for you to query based on your dataset splits and configs. 
```

> ## DuckDB WASM 🦆

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### DuckDB WASM 🦆
```

[DuckDB WASM](https://duckdb.org/docs/api/wasm/overview.html) is the engine that powers the SQL Console. It is an in-process database engine that runs on Web Assembly in the browser. No server or backend needed.

By being soley in the browser, it gives the user the upmost flexibility to query data as they please without any dependencies. It also makes it really simple to share reproducible results with a simple link.

You may be wondering, _"Will it work for big datasets?"_ and the answer is, "Yes!". 

> Here's a query of the [OpenCo7/UpVoteWeb](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenCo7/UpVoteWeb) dataset which has `12.6M` rows in the Parquet conversion.

Reviewer 3: The results are the ones in the first 5GB of data, aren't they?

Author: yes!

Author: Thanks for all the help with the wording. Helped me realize I probably need to post in Google Docs with Grammarly.

Could the reddit dataset wording be more clear?

![Reddit Movie Suggestions](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/reddit-movie-suggestions.png)

You can see we received results for a simple filter query in under 3 seconds. 

> While queries will take longer based on the size of the dataset and query complexity, you will be suprised about how much you can do with the SQL Console. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While queries will take longer based on the size of the dataset and query complexity, you will be surprised about how much you can do with the SQL Console. 
```

As with any technology, there are limitations.

> - The SQL Console will work for a lot of queries, however, the memory limit is ~3GB, so it is possible to run out of memory and not be able to process the query (_Tip: try to use filters to reduce the amount of data you are querying along with `LIMIT`_).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The SQL Console will work for a lot of queries. However, the memory limit is ~3GB, so it is possible to run out of memory and not be able to process the query (_Tip: try to use filters to reduce the amount of data you are querying along with `LIMIT`_).
```

> - While DuckDB WASM is very powerful, it is not fully feature parity with DuckDB. For example, DuckDB WASM does not yet support the [`hf://` protocol to query datasets](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb-wasm/discussions/1858).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- While DuckDB WASM is very powerful, it doesn't have full feature parity with DuckDB. For example, DuckDB WASM does not yet support the [`hf://` protocol to query datasets](https://github.com/duckdb/duckdb-wasm/discussions/1858).
```

Why is this important in the context of the console?

Author: Users sometimes expect certain things that work in DuckDB Python or DuckDB CLI to work in the wasm console. Common example is `hf://` see image below. Other things like reading csv.gz files dont work.

<img width="915" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4acd15b3-6a02-412d-9eba-fcaf3b4b5642">

> ## Example: Converting a dataset from Alpaca to conversations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Example: Converting a dataset from Alpaca to conversations
```

Now that we've introduced the SQL Console, let's explore a practical example. When fine-tuning a Large Language Model (LLM), you often need to work with different data formats. One particularly popular format is the conversational format, where each row represents a multi-turn dialogue between a user and the model. The SQL Console can help us transform data into this format efficiently. Let's see how we can convert an Alpaca dataset to a conversational format using SQL.

> In this example, we will convert an Alpaca dataset to a conversational format. 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> Typically, it would be easiest to do this with a Python script, however, we can also use the SQL Console to do this in less than30 seconds. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Typically, it would be easier to do this with a Python script, however, we can also use the SQL Console to do this in less than 30 seconds. 
```

> Typically, it would be easiest to do this with a Python script, however, we can also use the SQL Console to do this in less than30 seconds. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Typically, developers would tackle this task with a Python pre-processing step, but we can show how to use the SQL Console to achieve the same in less than 30 seconds. 
```

### SQL

```sql
-- Convert Alpaca format to Conversation format
WITH 
source_view AS (
  SELECT * FROM train  -- Change 'train' to your desired view name here
)
SELECT 
  [
    struct_pack(
      "from" := 'user',
      "value" := CASE 
                   WHEN input IS NOT NULL AND input != '' 
                   THEN instruction || '\n\n' || input
                   ELSE instruction
                 END
    ),
    struct_pack(
      "from" := 'assistant',
      "value" := output
    )
  ] AS conversation
FROM source_view
WHERE instruction IS NOT NULL 
AND output IS NOT NULL;
```

In the query we use the `struct_pack` function to create a new STRUCT row for each conversation.

DuckDB has great documentation on the `STRUCT` [Data Type](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/data_types/struct.html) and [Functions](https://duckdb.org/docs/sql/functions/struct.html). You'll find many datasets contain columns with JSON data. DuckDB provides functions to easily parse and query these columns.

![Alpaca to Conversation](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/sql_console/alpaca-to-conversation.png)

> Once we have the results, we can download the results as a Parquet file. You can see what the final output looks like below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once we have the results, we can download them as a Parquet file. You can see what the final output looks like below.
```

Reviewer 3: This would download the first 5GB transformed to the new format, is that correct?

Author: This just downloads whatever their SQL query results are (_on that 5GB Parquet_) if that makes sense?

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/cfahlgren1/alpaca-conversational/embed/viewer/default/train"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>

**Try it out!**

> You can try out a SQL Console query for [SkunkworksAI/reasoning-0.01](https://huggingface.co/datasets/SkunkworksAI/reasoning-0.01?sql_console=true&sql=--+Find+instructions+with+more+than+10+reasoning+steps%0Aselect+*+from+train%0Awhere+len%28reasoning_chains%29+%3E+10%0Alimit+100&sql_row=43) to see instructions with more than 10 reasoning steps.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an another example, you can try a SQL Console query for [SkunkworksAI/reasoning-0.01](https://huggingface.co/datasets/SkunkworksAI/reasoning-0.01?sql_console=true&sql=--+Find+instructions+with+more+than+10+reasoning+steps%0Aselect+*+from+train%0Awhere+len%28reasoning_chains%29+%3E+10%0Alimit+100&sql_row=43) to see instructions with more than 10 reasoning steps.
```

## SQL Snippets

DuckDB has a ton of use cases that we are still exploring. We created a [SQL Snippets](https://huggingface.co/spaces/cfahlgren1/sql-snippets) space to showcase what you can do with the SQL Console.

Here are some really interesting use cases we have found:

- [Filtering a function calling dataset for a specific function with regex](https://x.com/qlhoest/status/1835687940376207651)
- [Finding the most popular base models from open-llm-leaderboard](https://x.com/polinaeterna/status/1834601082862842270)
- [Converting an alpaca dataset to a conversational format](https://x.com/calebfahlgren/status/1834674871688704144)
- [Performing similarity search with embeddings](https://x.com/andrejanysa/status/1834253758152269903)
- [Filtering 50k+ rows from a dataset for the highest quality, reasoning instructions](https://x.com/calebfahlgren/status/1835703284943749301)

Remember, it's one click to download your SQL results as a Parquet file and use for your dataset!

We would love to hear what you think of the SQL Console and if you have any feedback, please comment in this [post!](https://huggingface.co/posts/cfahlgren1/845769119345136)

> ### Resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Resources
```
